(dev-plan)=

# OpenTurbine Development Plan

:::{warning}
This page is under construction. Check back here throughout FY23
for updates, and see activity at https://github.com/exawind/openturbine.
:::

## Background and overview

OpenTurbine development started in early 2023 with primary funding from the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Wind Energy Technologies Office and with
additional funding from the DOE Exascale Computing Project (ECP). It is being
developed by researchers at the National Rewable Energy Laboratory and Sandia
National Laboratories.

OpenTurbine is meant to be an open-source wind turbine structural dynamics
simulation code designed to meet the research needs of WETO and the broader
wind energy community for land-based and offshore wind turbines. OpenTurbine
will provide high-fidelity, highly performant structural dynamics models that
can couple with low-fidelity aerodynamic/hydrodynamic models like those in
OpenFAST, and high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models like
those in the WETO and Office of Science supported ExaWind code suite.
OpenTurbine will be designed to address shortcomings of wind turbine structural
models and codes that are so important to the success of WETO modeling efforts.

The computational
algorithms will incorporate robust open-source libraries for mathematical
operations, resource allocation, and data management. 

## Development priorities and use cases

*Development priorities:* Considering lessons learned from nearly a decade of
OpenFAST development, OpenTurbine will follow modern software development best
practices. The development process will require test-driven development,
version control, hierarchical automated testing, and continuous integration
leading to a robust development environment. The core data structures will be
memory efficient and will enable vectorization and parallelization at multiple
levels. They will be data-oriented in order exploit methods for accelerated
computing including high utilization of chip resources (e.g., single
instruction multiple data [SIMD]), parallelization through GPU or other
hardware, and support for memory-efficient architectures such as the ARM-based
Apple M-series chips. 

*Use-case priority:* Time-domain simulation of land-based wind turbine dynamics coupled to computational fluid dynamics for fluid-structure-interaction.

## Programming language and models

OpenTurbine is envisioned with a core written in C++ and leveraging Kokkos as its performance-portability library with inspiration from the ExaWind stack including Nalu-Wind CFD.

## High-level design




## Application Programming Interface (API)

The primary goal of the API is to provide data structures and interfaces
necessary for coupling OpenTurbine to the ExaWind CFD codes for
fluid-structure-interaction simulations. For land-based wind, the interface
will be designed to couple the beam finite element models and point-mass
elements (e.g., representation of the nacelle) to a CFD mesh.  We will leverage
the mesh mapping that was implemented and tested in the ExaWind codes. The
representation of the turbine geometry is handled within the fluid solver,
either as a three-dimensional surface mesh for high-fidelity geometry-resolved
simulations, or as an actuator-line for mid-fidelity simulations. Those
algorithms will work well for problems where a floating platform is represented
as a point-mass. For geometry-resolved floating-platform offshore simulations,
the API will be expanded to handle mapping from the structure surface mesh (if
solid/shell elements are used) to the CFD mesh.

## Key numerical algorithms

The models necessary for mid- to high-fidelity simulation of wind turbine
structural dynamics include linear and nonlinear finite-element models coupled
through constraints equations. For example, turbine blades may be modeled with
nonlinear beam finite elements, wherein the blade roots are constrained to
rotate with the hub. These models together constitute a set of
differential-algebraic equations (DAEs) in the time domain.  We will build on experiences gained with OpenFAST and the nonlinear-beam-dynamics module, BeamDyn.

For time integration of the index-3 DAEs we will use the generalized-alpha
algorithm now established in BeamDyn which allows user-controlled numerical
damping.  See Arnold and Br√ºls (2007) for details.

The primary model for turbine blades and tower, which are slender and flexible
structures, will be nonlinear finite elements based on geometrically exact beam
theory (GEBT), which includes include bend-twist coupling. Spatial
discretization will be based on Legendre spectral finite elements (LSFEs; like
those in BeamDyn), but with the explicit ability to use the subset of 2-node
finite elements (a special case of LSFEs). 

The choice of rotation representation is being determined.  BeamDyn relies
Wiener-Milenkovic vectorial rotation parameterization (3 rotational degrees of
freedom), which has singularities. The team is currently investigating the use
of quanterions which do not have singularities, but require 4 rotational
degrees of freedom.

## Verification and validation cases








## Target baseline turbines



